IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS. PREPRINT VERSION. ACCEPTED OCTOBER, 2021

1

Adaptive CLF-MPC With Application To
Quadrupedal Robots

arXiv:2112.04536v2 [cs.RO] 21 Mar 2022

Maria Vittoria Minniti, Ruben Grandia, Farbod Farshidian, Marco Hutter

Abstract—Modern robotic systems are endowed with superior
mobility and mechanical skills that make them suited to be
employed in real-world scenarios, where interactions with heavy
objects and precise manipulation capabilities are required. For
instance, legged robots with high payload capacity can be used in
disaster scenarios to remove dangerous material or carry injured
people. It is thus essential to develop planning algorithms that
can enable complex robots to perform motion and manipulation
tasks accurately. In addition, online adaptation mechanisms with
respect to new, unknown environments are needed. In this work,
we impose that the optimal state-input trajectories generated by
Model Predictive Control (MPC) satisfy the Lyapunov function
criterion derived in adaptive control for robotic systems. As a
result, we combine the stability guarantees provided by Control
Lyapunov Functions (CLFs) and the optimality offered by MPC
in a unified adaptive framework, yielding an improved performance during the robot’s interaction with unknown objects.
We validate the proposed approach in simulation and hardware
tests on a quadrupedal robot carrying un-modeled payloads and
pulling heavy boxes.
Index Terms—Robust/Adaptive Control; Optimization and Optimal Control; Legged Robots

I. INTRODUCTION
Ne major challenge for the real-world deployment of
robots is the absence of a perfect model of all the objects
that the robot should manipulate. In addition, the model of the
robot itself may be uncertain, since it is difficult to perfectly
identify the dynamic parameters of all its components. Based
on this motivation, a fruitful, vast amount of literature has been
dedicated to the development of adaptive control algorithms
[1] with a particular emphasis on direct approaches, such as the
notable Slotine-Li adaptive controller for robot manipulators
[2]. However, when it comes to the control of poly-articulated
mobile platforms, such as quadrupedal robots (Fig. 1), it is
necessary to devise methods that can reliably handle more
complex, nonlinear performance objectives (such as foothold
selection and end-effector tracking), as well as a set of safety
constraints. Thus, much analysis is currently being devoted to
the study of approaches aimed at combining adaptive control
laws with powerful learning and optimization algorithms [3].

O

Manuscript received: September, 9, 2021; Accepted October, 30, 2021.
This paper was recommended for publication by Editor Clement Gosselin
upon evaluation of the Associate Editor and Reviewers’ comments.
This work was supported in part by the Swiss National Science Foundation
through the National Centre of Competence in Digital Fabrication (NCCR
dfab), in part by the Swiss National Science Foundation through the National
Centre of Competence in Research Robotics (NCCR Robotics), and in part
by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme
under grant agreement No 780883.
All authors are with the Robotic Systems Lab, ETH Zurich, Zurich 8092,
Switzerland {mminniti}@ethz.ch
Digital Object Identifier (DOI): https://doi.org/10.1109/LRA.2021.3128697

Figure 1: The quadrupedal robot ANYmal pulling a box of
21 kg (at the top), and holding a payload of 10.86 kg (at the
bottom).

In [4], the disturbance experienced by the robot is parametrized
through a neural network; the inner features parameters are
meta-learned offline in closed-loop simulations of model ensembles under adaptive control. A deep network is used in [5]
for quadrotor control; adaptation to different flight regimes
is achieved using an MRAC law for the last layer weights.
Research has also been conducted to add adaptive control stability guarantees in Quadratic Programs (QPs). Specifically for
legged robots, an L1 adaptive controller is designed in [6], [7]
to track a nominal model based on a QP. For systems in strict
feedback form, online adaptation and safety can be obtained by
incorporating adaptive Control Lyapunov Functions (aCLFs)
[8], [9] and adaptive Control Barrier Functions (aCBFs) in
the QP formulation [10]. Stochastic CBFs and stochastic CLFs
have been used in QPs to obtain stability and safety conditions
where model uncertainty is approximated via Bayesian model
learning [11]. CLFs have already been used as a powerful tool
to synthesize direct adaptive controllers [12]. In the context of
infinite horizon optimal control, a direct adaptive controller
can be obtained as the sum of the nominal optimal input, and
an adaptive input that uses the optimal value function as a
CLF [13].
Thanks to recent computational advances, Model Predictive
Control (MPC) has shown real-time applicability on highdimensional systems [14], [15]. However, the performance of
nominal MPC degrades in the presence of model uncertainties.
Robust MPC can cope with disturbances in a known set, although only few works have shown applications on real-world,

©2021 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including
reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or
reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.

2

IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS. PREPRINT VERSION. ACCEPTED OCTOBER, 2021

robotic systems [16]. Moreover, it has been demonstrated that
online adaptation to the unknown parameters can provide MPC
with robustness properties with respect to disturbances in a
larger domain [17]. In robotics, adaptive MPC controllers have
mostly been designed in combination with system identification [18], [19], [20], or learning methods [21]. For mobilemanipulation problems, analysis on the combination of MPC
with adaptive control has been conducted in [22].
CLF stability criteria have also been added as constraints in
MPC [23], [24], [25], where stability guarantees are usually
obtained with a properly designed terminal cost and terminal
constraint [26]. In the absence of such terminal conditions,
which are complex to obtain for non-linear problems, MPC
relies on the choice of the time horizon, with decreasing
performance for smaller look-ahead. Incorporating CLF constraints within MPC allows to exploit the stability properties
of CLF-QP controllers, and eases the tuning of the prediction
horizon [25]. However, so far such advantages have not been
shown in the presence of uncertainties in the robot non-linear
MPC model.
Inspired by recent literature [25], we propose here to
combine CLFs with MPC, targeting robotic applications that
involve interaction with unknown environments/objects. The
contributions of this letter are the following:
• We consider the Lyapunov condition derived in adaptive
control for robotic manipulators [2], and we incorporate it
as an inequality constraint to an MPC problem. Thus, the
controller plans for an approximate system model, while
ensuring asymptotic tracking in the presence of matched
uncertainties. As a result, we combine the optimality
of MPC with the advantages provided by CLFs. These
include the stability guarantees and a reduced dependence
on the prediction horizon.
• We present the implementation of the proposed formulation on a floating-base model of a quadrupedal robot.
• We validate the proposed setup in a variety of simulations
and real-world hardware experiments. The simulations
aim to demonstrate the advantages of the proposed approach with respect to some baseline methods. These
characterize themselves for the presence/absence of a
terminal penalty, the awareness of the model mismatch,
or the use of a different adaptation mechanism. The
hardware tests showcase a quadrupedal robot carrying
bricks and pulling heavy boxes.
II. BACKGROUND
A. Nonlinear Model Predictive Control
We consider the following nonlinear optimal control problem (OCP):
Z T
minimize
l(x(t), u(t))dt + φ(x(T ))
(1a)
u(·)

subject to:

where x(t) ∈ X , u(t) ∈ U are the state and input to the
system, l(·) is an intermediate cost, φ(·) is a terminal cost,
and T is the time horizon. The OCP is solved in real-time by
updating the initial conditions (1c) with the measured state of
the system. Eq. (1b) describes the system dynamics, Eqs. (1d)–
(1f) describe the state-only equality constraints, state-input
equality constraints and inequality constraints, respectively.
Here, we consider an MPC implementation where inequality
constraints (1f) are treated according to a relaxed-barrier
method [27]: a relaxed log-barrier function is computed as
a function of the inequality constraint, and added to the
cost minimization. Without loss of generality, we present the
following derivation in the continuous-time domain. However,
the proposed method does not depend on the specific implementation (e.g., continuous-time or discrete-time DDP, direct
methods, etc...). In addition, in Sec. III we assume that Eq.
(1b) represents a general mechanical system. In Sec. IV, we
apply this general formulation on the simplified kino-dynamic
model of a quadrupedal robot.
B. Control Lyapunov Functions
We consider an error function σ : X × R+ → Rl , with
l ≤ dim(X ). Let C = {σ(x, t), x ∈ X , t ∈ R+ } ⊆ Rl . We
assume that each component of σ has relative degree 1.
Definition 1 (Class K-functions [25]). A continuous function
α : [0, a) → R+ , with a > 0, is a class-K function (α ∈ K) if
α(0) = 0 and α is strictly monotonically increasing. If a = ∞
and limr→∞ α(r) = ∞, then α is said to be a class-K∞
function.
Definition 2 (Control Lyapunov Funtions [28], [25]). A continuously differentiable funtion V : Rl → R+ is said to be a
Control Lyapunov Function (CLF) for (1b) on C if there exist
α1 , α2 , α3 ∈ K∞ such that ∀σ ∈ C:
α1 (||σ||) ≤ V (σ) ≤ α2 (||σ||)

(2)

V̇ (σ, u) ≤ −α3 (||σ||)

(3)

The existence of a CLF V (σ) is a necessary and sufficient
condition for the existence of a state-feedback controller
k : X → U that makes σ globally asymptotically converge
to 0. As shown in Sec. III, for affine robotic systems and
by an appropriate definition of σ, convergence to the error
surface σ = 0 can also lead to the convergence of the fullsystem state x to a desired state xd . In QP-based controllers,
a method to obtain stability guarantees is to add inequality (3)
to the set of constraints of the QP [29]. A natural extension for
MPC problems consists in adding (3) to the set of inequality
constraints of Eq. (1f) [23], [24], [25]. We build from this idea
for the following derivation.

ẋ = f (x) + B(x)u

(1b)

x(0) = x0

(1c)

III. A DAPTIVE CLF - MPC FOR ROBOTIC SYSTEMS
A. Adaptive Optimal Control Problem
We want to control mechanical systems in the form:

g1 (x) = 0

(1d)

Mn (q)v̇ + Cn (q, v)v + gn (q) + τ u (q, v, v̇) = S(q)τ (4)

g2 (x, u) = 0

(1e)

h(x, u) ≥ 0

(1f)

where q, v ∈ Rn , τ ∈ Rm are the generalized positions,
velocities and torques of the robot, respectively, S ∈ Rn×m

0

MINNITI et al.: ADAPTIVE CLF-MPC WITH APPLICATION TO QUADRUPEDAL ROBOTS

is an actuator selection matrix, and τ u ∈ Rn is an uncertainty
term. The subscript n refers to all the variables related to the
nominal model of the robot, which is usually acquired from
offline identification. The subscript u refers to the unknown
terms, that may include external forces due to payloads or
contact forces. We make the assumption that the uncertainty
τ u is a matched uncertainty, meaning that τ u ∈ range(S).
We assume that τ u (q, v, v̇) can be parametrized linearly with
respect to the constant, unknown parameters π u ∈ Rp :
τ u (q, v, v̇) = Yu (q, v, v̇)π u

(5)

and that we can write:
Yj (q, v, v̇)π j = Mj (q)v̇ + Cj (q, v)v + gj (q)

(6)

where j = n, u, Mj > 0 and Ṁj −2Cj is skew-symmetric. It
can be verified that the assumptions on the unknown term τ u
are not restrictive and that, for a quadrupedal robot, they cover
the case where τ u includes gravitational and inertial effects
due to un-modeled payloads at the main body.
Let q̃, ṽ be the generalized position and velocity errors with
respect to some desired references qd (t), vd (t). We define a
composite error σ(q̃, ṽ) as a function of the errors q̃, ṽ (and
thus implicitly a function of q, v, t), with the property that
q̃ → 0 when it evolves on the surface S = {(q̃, ṽ) ∈ R2n |σ =
0}. In the literature [2], [30], S is usually called sliding surface
and referred to as σ = 0. If v = q̇, we can simply choose
σ := ṽ +Λq̃, with Λ > 0. In addition, we define vr := σ +v,
x := (q, v), u := τ . We propose the following adaptive CLFMPC scheme (ACLF-MPC) for robotic systems:
Z T
minimize
l(x(t), u(t))dt + φ(x(T ))
(7a)
u(·)

subject to:

0

ẋ = fa (x, u, π̂ u )

(7b)

x(0) = x0
g1 (x) = 0

(7c)

g2 (x, u) = 0

(7d)

h(x, u) ≥ 0

(7e)

hclf (x, u, π̂ u ) ≥ 0

(7f)

where ẋ = fa in Eq. (7b) is an adaptive system dynamics,
parametrized by π̂ u . We update the unknown parameters
estimates π̂ u according to:
π̂˙ u = ΓYuT (q, v, vr , v̇r )σ,

Γ ∈ Rp×p , Γ > 0,

(8)

with a modified regressor Yu obtained from the equation:
Yu (q, v, vr , v̇r )π u = Mu (q)v̇r + Cu (q, v)vr + gu (q). (9)
For the sake of brevity, in the following we omit the dependency of Yu on (q, v, vr , v̇r ).
Eqs. (7c)–(7e) describe a set of safety constraints; for
instance, in the case of a quadrupedal robot, they include
friction cone constraints to avoid slippage and zero-velocity
contraints at the contact points. In the adaptive dynamics of
Eq. (7b), we define:
v̇ = Mn (q)−1 [−Cn (q, v)v − gn (q) + S(q)τ − Yu π̂ u ]

(10)

3

Figure 2: Block diagram of the main components of the ACLFMPC method, as described in Sec. III-A.
Let KD ∈ Rn×n , KD > 0. The left-hand side of the
constraint in Eq. (7f) has the form:
1
hclf = −σ T [−S(q)τ + Yn π n + Yu π̂ u ] − σ T KD σ (11)
2
and will be derived explicitly in the following paragraph. A
scheme of the main building blocks of the proposed method
is provided in Fig. 2.
B. CLF constraint and adaptive dynamics
The inequality hclf ≥ 0 in Eq. (7f) is set equal to the
condition V̇ ≤ −W , with the Lyapunov-like candidate V and
the function W defined as:
1
1
V (q, σ, π̃ u ) := σ T M (q)σ + π̃ Tu Γ−1 π̃ u ,
(12)
2
2
1
W (σ) := σ T KD σ
2
where π̃ u := π̂ u − π u , and M := Mn + Mu . We point out
that V is only positive definite in σ (and π̃ u ), and σ(q̃, ṽ)
is not a sufficient coordinate change for the full-dynamics of
the system. However, the inequality V̇ ≤ −W still guarantees
global asymptotic stability and boundedness of q̃, ṽ. Indeed, if
V̇ ≤ −W , the error state q̃, ṽ converges to the sliding surface
σ(q̃, ṽ) = 0. This yields q̃ → 0 as t → ∞.
It can be verified that, if the estimates π̂ u are updated
according to Eq. (8), hclf does not depend on the unknown
parameters π u . To prove this, we note that the equations of
motion (4) can be written in an equivalent form:
M (q)σ̇ + C(q, v)σ

(13)

= −S(q)τ + Yn (q, v, vr , v̇r )π n + Yu (q, v, vr , v̇r )π u ,
with C := Cn + Cu . Deriving V along the trajectories of (13)
yields:
1 T
σ Ṁ (q)σ + σ T M (q)σ̇ + π̃ Tu Γ−1 π̂˙ u
2
1
= σ T [Ṁ (q) − 2C(q, v)]σ + σ T [−S(q)τ
2
+ Yn π n + Yu π u ] + π̃ T Γ−1 π̂˙ u

V̇ =

(14)

u

= σ T [−S(q)τ + Yn π n + Yu π̂ u ] + π̃ Tu [Γ−1 π̂˙ u
− YuT σ]
= σ T [−S(q)τ + Yn π n + Yu π̂ u ]

(15)

where the skew-symmetry of Ṁ −2C has been used, together
with the update law (8). Thus, re-formulating the inequality
as hclf = −V̇ − W ≥ 0 yields Eq. (11).
Incorporating the constraint hclf ≥ 0 into the MPC problem
forces the optimal input τ to be a globally asymptotically

4

IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS. PREPRINT VERSION. ACCEPTED OCTOBER, 2021

stabilizing input for (4). Theoretically, such a constraint is
sufficient to guarantee global asymptotic stability. However,
inequalities are usually treated as soft constraints [27]. On the
other hand, the MPC dynamics (7b) is a hard constraint. As a
consequence, if (7b) would only be based on the robot nominal
model, it could conflict with the CLF constraint, leading to the
latter not being satisfied. Thus, the term Yu (q, v, vr , v̇r )π̂ u
is used in place of the true disturbance Yu (q, v, v̇)π u in the
dynamic constraint of Eq. (10). The adaptive component Yu π̂ u
serves both as an estimate of the disturbance, and to generate
the adaptation needed in the system dynamics to allow the
satisfaction of the CLF constraint. Furthermore, this choice
allows obtaining an MPC controller which is also a certainty
equivalence controller [17]. Indeed, Eq. (10) is equivalent to
incorporate the following two constraints in the MPC problem:
S(q)w := S(q)τ − Yu (q, v, vr , v̇r )π̂ u
−1

v̇ = Mn (q)

[−Cn (q, v)v − gn (q) + S(q)w]

(16)
(17)

with the introduction of an auxiliary input w ∈ U. Eq.
(17) represents the nominal system, while Eq. (16) can be
solved exactly with respect to τ because of the assumption of
matched uncertainty. As a result, the optimal input τ ∗ is given
by the sum of a nominal input w∗ , and an adaptive disturbance
estimate.
C. Convergence of the adaptive dynamics
In adaptive control, it is not required that the estimated
parameters converge to the true values. However, for linear
systems, there exist persistent excitation conditions that can be
incorporated as MPC constraints to obtain such a convergence
[31]. As pointed out in [30], analogous simple conditions do
not exist for nonlinear systems. Thus, here we aim to achieve
approximate convergence of the adaptive uncertainty Yu π̂ u
to the true uncertainty Yu π u by an appropriate cost function
tuning. We refer again to the auxiliary input w defined in Eq.
(16). Because of the constraint (7f), in closed-loop σ → 0,
and thus the robot dynamics (13) reduces to:
S(q)τ ≈ Yn π n +Yu π u ⇒ S(q)w+Yu π̂ u ≈ Yn π n +Yu π u .
We suppose that the MPC cost is designed such that the
difference ||S(q)w − Yn π n || is minimized. We are left with:
Yu (q, v, vr , v̇r )π̂ u ≈ Yu (q, v, vr , v̇r )π u + 
where  is a residual error from the minimization of ||S(q)w−
Yn π n ||. If such an error is small, the adaptive term Yu π̂ u
converges to the true uncertainty Yu π u . In the absence of
persistently exciting references, this does not imply π̂ u ≈ π u .
However, it implies that the MPC dynamics approximately
converges to the true dynamics.
IV. I MPLEMENTATION FOR A QUADRUPEDAL ROBOT
In this section, we describe the implementation of the
MPC problem given in Eqs. (7a)–(8) for the 6-dimensional
floating-base model of a quadrupedal robot interacting with
un-modeled objects at its base (Fig. 3).

Figure 3: Illustration of the considered scenario for a
quadrupedal robot. The MPC control inputs for the single
rigid-body model are the feet contact forces λEE i . The
uncertain parameters are due to un-modeled payloads (π in
u )
and constant wrenches acting on the base (π fu ).
A. Adaptive dynamics and constraints
To derive the adaptive modification of the MPC dynamics,
we base ourselves on the kino-dynamic model described in
[27]. The adaptive equations of motion are given by:

ṗ = vp
(18)





θ̇ = T (θ)ω
(19)




1 X4
RW B λEEi − RW B fu )
(20)
v̇p = g + (
i=1
m

X4



ω̇ = I −1 (−ω × Iω +
rEEi × λEEi − tu ) (21)


i=1



θ̇ j = ξ j
(22)
where p, θ ∈ R3 are the position of the robot center of
mass (CoM) in world frame {W } and the base Euler angles,
respectively. T (θ) is the mapping from the base angular
velocity ω, expressed in base frame {B}, and the Euler angles
time derivative θ̇. I and m are the moment of inertia about
the CoM and the mass of the robot, respectively. rEEi is the
position of the foot i with respect to the CoM, and θ j are
the legs’ joint positions. The MPC control input is given by
u = (ξ j , λEE i ), where ξ j are the legs’ joint velocities and
λEE i is the reference contact force for the ith-foot, expressed
in base frame. The kino-dynamic model described in Eqs.
(18)-(22) is composed of a free-floating, single rigid-body
model and a kinematic model for the legs’ joints. Here, we
concentrate on the problem of tracking a desired pose (center
of mass position and base orientation) for the single rigid-body
subsystem (Eqs. (18)-(21)) which has the properties described
in Sec. III-A. Let q := (p, θ) ∈ R6 and v := (vp , ω) ∈ R6 ,
respectively. We define an adaptive wrench (combined force
and torque) acting on the robot base:
 
fu
f
f
= Yu (q, v, v̇)π u = Yuin (q, v, v̇)π in
u + Yu (q, v)π u
tu
(23)
In Eq. (23), π fu ∈ R6 includes constant forces and torques
10
acting on the robot, while π in
is a vector of unknown
u ∈R
inertial parameters (a combination of the mass of the unknown
payload, center of mass and inertia). Yuin can be derived

MINNITI et al.: ADAPTIVE CLF-MPC WITH APPLICATION TO QUADRUPEDAL ROBOTS

through the standard procedure for the Slotine-Li regressor
[32], and distinguishing between the robot nominal parameters
in
π in
n and those of the payload π u . Since a legged robot is
under-actuated in many walking scenarios [27], the minimization described in Sec. III-C is not perfectly achievable for the
full 6-dimensional set of generalized coordinates. Thus, here
we impose it only for the translational part of the floatingbase model. This is equivalent to designing the cost function
so that it equally distributes
P4the robot weight among the feet
in contact, such that: || i=1 RW B λEE i − mvpr + mg −
RW B fu || ≈ 0.
Eqs. (7c)–(7e) include end-effector velocity constraints for
swing and stance legs, as well as friction cone constraints for
the feet in contact; we refer the reader to [27] for a more
detailed description of the nominal model and constraints.
As described in Sec. III-A, we make the assumption that the
parametric uncertainty Yu π u is in a matched form. In practice,
for a quadrupedal robot this requires that the robot has at least
three feet in contact, or that the disturbance Yu π u acts along
a controllable direction (for instance, during a trotting gait,
only the angle around the line of the two contact points is not
controllable).
B. Sliding surface for pose control
The implementation of the adaptive Lyapunov constraint
requires the definition of the composite error σ := (σ l , σ o ) for
the floating-base linear and rotational dynamics. For the linear
part, we can simply use σ l := ṽp + Λl p̃. Indeed, the position
error p̃ evolves on the surface σ l = 0 with an asymptotically
stable dynamics. As discussed in [30], the implementation of
an adaptive controller for the rotational dynamics requires the
choice of a suitable rotation error. Here, we use the quaternion
error as defined in [32]:
eo := ηd − ηd  − d × 

(24)

where Q = (η, ), Qd = (ηd , d ) are the base actual and desired quaternions, respectively, and (·)× is the skew operator.
As demonstrated in [32], if we define σ o := ω̃ + Λo eo , we
have that eo → 0 on the surface σ o = 0.
C. Conversion to torque commands
For a robotic arm, the MPC control torques τ can be directly
commanded to the robot (Fig. 2). However, for a floating-base
system, a step is needed to convert MPC optimal control inputs
to torque commands. Here, desired contact forces, along with
desired accelerations obtained from the forward simulation
of Eqs. (20), (21) are tracked by a hierarchical whole-body
QP controller [33], where the learned dynamics Yu π̂ u is also
compensated to take care of the model mismatch.
V. R ESULTS
In this section, we validate the proposed approach in simulation and hardware tests on the quadrupedal robot ANYmal
(Fig. 1). A video showcasing the results accompanies this
letter 1 . For the underlying MPC computations, we use a
1 Available at https://youtu.be/Gu2mfAAvT0A.

5

Multiple Shooting algorithm provided by the OCS2 toolbox
[34]. The problem is formulated as an OCP for switched
systems [15], where the CLF constraint in Eq. (7f) depends
on different contact conditions and is thus affected by the
transitions between subsystems. During the hardware tests, all
computations run on a single on-board PC (Intel i7-8850H,
2.6 GHz, hexa-core 64-bit) with the MPC solver running at
100 Hz with a time horizon of 1 s and the whole-body QP
controller and state estimation running at 400 Hz. In all the
proposed tests, we assume that the regressor related to the
unknown parameters is as in (23). Unless otherwise stated,
the uncertainties include both un-modeled inertial parameters
10
π in
u ∈ R , and constant disturbance forces applied on the
base π fu ∈ R3 . These are either due to forces generated on
purpose in the simulation environment (Sec. V-B), to the static
friction torque present in the actuators (Sec. V-C), or to the
static/dynamic force between the ground and the object that
the robot carries (Sec. V-D).
A. Comparative analysis
We perform a comparative analysis of different methods
which are feasible to be applied on the high-dimensional
model of a quadrupedal robot. The analysis is conducted in
a physics simulation, where we can precisely quantify the
amount of model mismatch. We assume that the MPC model
under-estimates the actual ANYmal mass of 20 kg (≈40% of
the nominal mass), and that the true center of mass is displaced
by 0.3 m along the base x-direction from the center of mass
of the MPC model. We test the following five baselines:
1) ACLF-MPC
2) ACLF-MPC without terminal cost
3) CLF-MPC
4) Perfect-model MPC with terminal cost
5) Perfect-model MPC without terminal cost
The controllers 1) and 2) correspond to the presented method,
tested with and without a terminal cost. This is set equal to
the value function of an LQR, obtained from the linearization
of the original problem. Indeed, although the terminal cost
has been presented as part of the proposed method in Sec.
III, here we show that the CLF constraint helps reducing the
controller dependency on such terminal component. The CLFMPC without adaptive ability is tested in 3), where the stability
constraint is obtained from the CLF of the nominal model.
In terms of tracking performance, ideal results are attainable
with an MPC problem that is perfectly aware of the model
mismatch. Baselines 4) and 5) correspond to this ideal case,
which does not include a CLF constraint and where the model
mismatch is known to the controller.
All the methods employ the same intermediate cost function,
which was tuned so that the best performance is obtained in the
nominal case. For the ACLF-MPC, the adaptation gain matrix
is chosen as Γ = diag(Γm , Γcom , ΓI ), where Γm = 5.0,
Γcom = I3×3 , and ΓI = 0.01I6×6 relate to the uncertainties in
the robot mass, combined center of mass and rotational inertia,
respectively. The initial values of the estimated parameters are
set to zero. The tuning gains Λl , Λo were chosen as Λl = Λo
= 5I3×3 , while KD = diag(50, 50, 50, 80, 80, 80). During the

6

IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS. PREPRINT VERSION. ACCEPTED OCTOBER, 2021

Table II: RMSE for a simulation test with a quadrupedal robot
under the five baseline MPC controllers described in Sec.
V-A, with a time horizon of 0.5 s. A bar - indicates that the
controller failed.
Method
1
2
3 4 5
Linear RMSE [m]
0.035 0.037 - 0.04 Angular RMSE [deg] 3.16 3.56 - 2.62 -

Figure 4: Position and rotation errors for a simulation test with
a quadrupedal robot under the five baseline MPC controllers
introduced in Sec. V-A, with a time horizon of 0.5 s.
Table I: Linear and angular RMSE errors for a simulation
test with a quadrupedal robot under the five baseline methods
described in Sec. V-A, with a time horizon of 1 s.
Method
1
2
3
4
5
Linear RMSE [m]
0.036 0.036 0.10 0.04 0.04
Angular RMSE [deg] 3.23 3.32 10.2 3.12 3.14

simulation, we command the robot to stand while following
a desired center of mass position and base orientation trajectory. The reference trajectory consists of a sequence of step
references for the center of mass vertical component, and the
base pitch and roll angles. To validate the advantages that
the ACLF-MPC also provides with respect to the prediction
horizon tuning, we repeat the same test under a time horizon
of 1 s and 0.5 s, respectively. The root mean square linear and
rotational errors (RMSE) are reported in Tab. I and II.
With a time horizon of 1.0 s, the ACLF-MPC formulation
performs comparatively well as the perfect-model MPC controller. In particular, the position tracking error even slightly
improves with the proposed formulation with respect to the
theoretical perfect-model baseline. In contrast, the ACLF-MPC
outperforms the CLF-MPC that does not use any adaptation
mechanism.
Interesting conclusions can be drawn from the behaviour of
the five MPC controllers under a smaller time horizon (Fig.
4 and Table II). In fact, the system becomes unstable under
the perfect-model MPC controller that does not use a terminal
cost. In addition, the CLF-MPC problem without adaptation
becomes unfeasible due to the planned contact forces not
adapting to the unknown payload distribution. On the contrary,
the ACLF-MPC controller determines a closed-loop stable
behavior even without the need for a terminal cost.
B. Comparison with an online adaptation method
As an additional baseline comparison, we consider an adaptive method that estimates external forces and torques exerted
on the robot base according to a generalized momentum
approach, based on [20]. As in the proposed method, the
estimated wrench is compensated online in the MPC dynamics.

Such an approach is purely based on system identification,
while our method is driven by the convergence of the pose
tracking error. We consider a Gazebo simulation scenario
where the robot walks up a slope with a statically stable gait,
while it is subject to a constant disturbance force F acting in
the opposite direction to the robot motion. Here, walking on an
inclined surface is proposed as a representative scenario where
the base orientation tracking has a relevant influence on the
balance of the robot. We gradually increase the value of the
constant external force to validate which of the two methods
can tolerate the largest amount of un-modeled disturbance.
We find that, under the momentum observer method, the
robot loses its balance along the slope when F ≥ 70N ,
while the robot remains stable under the proposed approach.
In fact, the momentum observer approach does not include
the CLF constraint in the MPC problem. Consequently, the
contact forces are computed based only on the cost function
minimization, which tends to distribute the forces equally
among the feet in contact. In a scenario where an external
force is applied on the robot in the direction opposite to the
motion, a torque around the base is generated, leading to a
larger orientation error. On the other hand, the ACLF-MPC
method explicitly adds an additional tracking requirement,
which is embedded in the Lyapunov constraint. This in turn
allows the robot to maintain balance while walking on the
inclined surface.
C. Base tracking under heavy bricks
We also validate how the ACLF-MPC formulation performs
in a set of real-world hardware experiments. Here, we place
two heavy bricks on top of the robot; the weight of each
brick is 5.43 kg. Moreover, we add a third brick of 3.4 kg
at random positions on top of the base, in such a way as to
cause a perturbation to the center of mass of the system. An
additional source of modeling errors comes from the effects
that the payload has on the dynamics of legs’ joints, and
that is neglected in the MPC kino-dynamic model. Initially,
we command the robot to stand on four feet while keeping
a desired constant base position and orientation. We repeat
this experiment under the baseline nominal MPC controller
(i.e., based on the robot nominal model), and the ACLF-MPC
approach. As a compact measure of the tracking performance,
in Fig. 5 we show the constraint hclf from Eq. (7f). Under
the nominal MPC controller, hclf settles at a non-zero value.
On the contrary, under the proposed controller, the value of
the constraint converges to 0. This implies that the tracking
error converges to the surface σ = 0. As described in Sec.
III, convergence of the tracking error is achieved by the combination of a soft inequality constraint, and by compensating

MINNITI et al.: ADAPTIVE CLF-MPC WITH APPLICATION TO QUADRUPEDAL ROBOTS

7

Figure 5: CLF constraint for the experiment described in Sec.
V-C. The plots refer to two different tests where the robot is
controlled with the ACLF-MPC approach (on the left), and
with the nominal MPC (on the right).
Figure 7: Base rotation and center of mass position errors for
an experiment where the robot pulls an un-modelled box of
16.17 kg.

Figure 6: Adaptive force (on the left) and torque (on the right)
for an experiment where the robot holds two un-modelled
bricks, while the system center of mass is modified by placing
a third brick at different positions on the base.

the adaptive wrench Yu π̂ u = (fu , tu ) in the MPC dynamics
(Eq. (10)). The latter is displayed in the plots of Fig. 6. These
show how all the components of the adaptive force and torque
contribute to compensate for the center of mass perturbation.
As shown in the attached video, we also send position and
orientation references to the robot during walking. We repeat
such experiment with two bricks on top of the robot, under
the nominal MPC controller and the ACLF-MPC controller,
respectively. Under the nominal MPC controller, the robot
exhibits an unbalanced behavior, due to not being able to track
the desired pose commands (especially with respect to the z
position and pitch angle). On the other hand, it can be seen
from the video that, under the proposed formulation, the robot
walks stably.
D. Box pulling
In this experiment, we are interested in making the robot
pull a heavy box. We repeat the same experiment twice for two
different weights of the box. In the first experiment, the box
weighs 16.17 kg. In the second test, we make the task more
challenging by increasing the weight up to 21.6 kg. We repeat
both the experiments under the ACLF-MPC method and the
nominal MPC. Base rotation and center of mass position errors

Figure 8: Base rotation and center of mass position errors for
an experiment where the robot pulls an un-modelled box of
21.03 kg.
are displayed in Fig. 7 and 8, for the scenarios with the lighter
box and heavier box, respectively. During the experiments, the
desired position is computed by integrating a desired velocity
of approximately 0.2 m/s, which is generated with a joystick.
For safety reasons, position and orientation commands are
reset whenever the errors grow larger than a threshold (for
instance, for the center of mass position error along the base
x-direction, the threshold is 0.1 m). As visible from Fig. 7 and
8, the proposed formulation succeeds in improving the base
tracking, and as a consequence the robot is able to pull the
box forward. Also, it helps to remove oscillations that could
compromise the stability of the system. This is particularly
visible from the plots displaying the roll angular error and
the y position error. When pulling the heavier box (Fig. 8)
such oscillations are especially strong and make the robot
unstable. In Fig. 9, we also show the adaptation of the wrench
translational component with respect to the different friction
forces that the robot experiences in the two scenarios.
VI. C ONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we presented an optimal approach that unifies
MPC with the online adaptation and the global stability con-

8

IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS. PREPRINT VERSION. ACCEPTED OCTOBER, 2021

Figure 9: Adaptive force Yu π̂ u for two experiments where the
robot pulls two heavy boxes.

ditions derived in adaptive control [2]. We described a general
formulation and an implementation for floating-base systems
interacting with objects of unknown dynamic properties. We
performed a number of simulations and hardware experiments
on a quadrupedal robot, that demonstrated the effectiveness
and the necessity of the proposed formulation.
Our implementation on a quadrupedal robot can handle
external payloads and unknown constant wrenches applied on
the base. In future work, we want to extend the method to
adapt to extra rigid loads on the legs. In addition, a possible
extension of this work would be to consider higher degreeof-freedom manipulators performing highly dynamic motions,
such as catching objects, where unknown loads could be
attached to any link, and the non-linear effects of more than
one body would need to be adapted.
R EFERENCES
[1] J.-J. E. Slotine, W. Li, et al., Applied nonlinear control. Prentice hall
Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1991, vol. 199, no. 1.
[2] J.-J. E. Slotine and W. Li, “On the adaptive control of robot manipulators,” The international journal of robotics research, vol. 6, no. 3, pp.
49–59, 1987.
[3] N. M. Boffi and J.-J. E. Slotine, “Implicit regularization and momentum
algorithms in nonlinearly parameterized adaptive control and prediction,”
Neural Computation, vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 590–673, 2021.
[4] S. M. Richards, N. Azizan, J.-J. Slotine, and M. Pavone, “AdaptiveControl-Oriented Meta-Learning for Nonlinear Systems,” in Proceedings
of Robotics: Science and Systems, Virtual, July 2021.
[5] G. Joshi, J. Virdi, and G. Chowdhary, “Asynchronous deep model
reference adaptive control,” Conference on Robot Learning, 2020.
[6] Y. Chen and Q. Nguyen, “Adaptive force-based control for legged
robots,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.06236, 2020.
[7] Q. Nguyen and K. Sreenath, “L 1 adaptive control for bipedal robots with
control lyapunov function based quadratic programs,” in 2015 American
Control Conference (ACC). IEEE, 2015, pp. 862–867.
[8] M. Krstić and P. V. Kokotović, “Control lyapunov functions for adaptive
nonlinear stabilization,” Systems & Control Letters, vol. 26, no. 1, pp.
17–23, 1995.
[9] J. Moore and R. Tedrake, “Adaptive control design for underactuated
systems using sums-of-squares optimization,” in 2014 American Control
Conference. IEEE, 2014, pp. 721–728.
[10] A. J. Taylor and A. D. Ames, “Adaptive safety with control barrier
functions,” in 2020 American Control Conference (ACC). IEEE, 2020,
pp. 1399–1405.
[11] D. D. Fan, J. Nguyen, R. Thakker, N. Alatur, A.-a. Agha-mohammadi,
and E. A. Theodorou, “Bayesian learning-based adaptive control for
safety critical systems,” in 2020 IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 2020, pp. 4093–4099.

[12] N. M. Boffi, S. Tu, N. Matni, J.-J. E. Slotine, and V. Sindhwani, “Learning stability certificates from data,” Conference on Robot Learning,
2020.
[13] B. T. Lopez and J.-J. E. Slotine, “Adaptive variants of optimal feedback
policies,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.02709, 2021.
[14] Y. Ding, A. Pandala, and H.-W. Park, “Real-time model predictive
control for versatile dynamic motions in quadrupedal robots,” in 2019
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE,
2019, pp. 8484–8490.
[15] F. Farshidian, E. Jelavic, A. Satapathy, M. Giftthaler, and J. Buchli,
“Real-time motion planning of legged robots: A model predictive
control approach,” in 2017 IEEE-RAS 17th International Conference
on Humanoid Robotics (Humanoids). IEEE, 2017, pp. 577–584.
[16] J. Nubert, J. Köhler, V. Berenz, F. Allgöwer, and S. Trimpe, “Safe and
fast tracking on a robot manipulator: Robust mpc and neural network
control,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 3050–
3057, 2020.
[17] R. Sinha, J. Harrison, S. M. Richards, and M. Pavone, “Adaptive robust
model predictive control with matched and unmatched uncertainty,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08261, 2021.
[18] C. Ding, L. Zhou, X. Rong, and Y. Li, “Online center of mass detection
for quadruped robots in trot gait motion,” in 2019 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics (ROBIO). IEEE, 2019, pp.
2140–2145.
[19] G. Tournois, M. Focchi, A. Del Prete, R. Orsolino, D. G. Caldwell, and
C. Semini, “Online payload identification for quadruped robots,” in 2017
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS). IEEE, 2017, pp. 4889–4896.
[20] S. Haddadin, A. De Luca, and A. Albu-Schäffer, “Robot collisions: A
survey on detection, isolation, and identification,” IEEE Transactions on
Robotics, vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 1292–1312, 2017.
[21] Y. Sun, W. Ubellacker, W. Ma, X. Zhang, C. Wang, N. CsomayShanklin, M. Tomizuka, K. Sreenath, and A. Ames, “Online learning of
unknown dynamics for model-based controllers in legged locomotion,”
IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2021.
[22] M. V. Minniti, R. Grandia, K. Fäh, F. Farshidian, and M. Hutter,
“Model predictive robot-environment interaction control for mobile
manipulation tasks,” in 2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics
and Automation (ICRA), 2021, pp. 1651–1657.
[23] J. A. Primbs, V. Nevistic, and J. C. Doyle, “A receding horizon
generalization of pointwise min-norm controllers,” IEEE Transactions
on Automatic Control, vol. 45, no. 5, pp. 898–909, 2000.
[24] J. Yu, A. Jadbabaie, J. Primbs, and Y. Huang, “Comparison of nonlinear
control design techniques on a model of the caltech ducted fan,”
Automatica, vol. 37, no. 12, pp. 1971–1978, 2001.
[25] R. Grandia, A. Taylor, A. Singletary, M. Hutter, and A. Ames, “Nonlinear Model Predictive Control of Robotic Systems with Control Lyapunov
Functions,” in Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems, Corvalis,
Oregon, USA, July 2020.
[26] J. B. Rawlings, D. Q. Mayne, and M. Diehl, Model predictive control:
theory, computation, and design. Nob Hill Publishing Madison, WI,
2017, vol. 2.
[27] R. Grandia, F. Farshidian, R. Ranftl, and M. Hutter, “Feedback mpc
for torque-controlled legged robots,” in 2019 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). IEEE, 2019, pp.
4730–4737.
[28] A. J. Taylor, V. D. Dorobantu, H. M. Le, Y. Yue, and A. D. Ames,
“Episodic learning with control lyapunov functions for uncertain robotic
systems,” in 2019 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS). IEEE, 2019, pp. 6878–6884.
[29] A. D. Ames and M. Powell, “Towards the unification of locomotion
and manipulation through control lyapunov functions and quadratic
programs,” in Control of Cyber-Physical Systems. Springer, 2013, pp.
219–240.
[30] P. Culbertson, J.-J. Slotine, and M. Schwager, “Decentralized adaptive
control for collaborative manipulation of rigid bodies,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, pp. 1–15, 2021.
[31] X. Lu, M. Cannon, and D. Koksal-Rivet, “Robust adaptive model
predictive control: Performance and parameter estimation,” International
Journal of Robust and Nonlinear Control, 2019.
[32] B. Siciliano, L. Sciavicco, L. Villani, and G. Oriolo, Robotics: modelling,
planning and control. Springer Science & Business Media, 2010.
[33] C. D. Bellicoso, C. Gehring, J. Hwangbo, P. Fankhauser, and M. Hutter,
“Perception-less terrain adaptation through whole body control and
hierarchical optimization,” in Humanoids, 2016, pp. 558–564.
[34] “OCS2: An open source library for optimal control of switched systems,”
[Online]. Available: https://github.com/leggedrobotics/ocs2.

