IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS, VOL. 30, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

6785

Adaptive MPC-Based Multi-Terrain Trajectory
Tracking Framework for Mobile Spherical Robots
Yifan Liu , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Tao Hu ,
Xiaoqing Guan , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Yixu Wang , Bixuan Zhang ,
You Wang , Member, IEEE, and Guang Li

Abstract—Multi-terrain trajectory tracking control is a
prerequisite for robots to execute tasks in the wild and unknown environments. However, due to the uncertainties in
both kinematics and dynamics, the current trajectory tracking framework for mobile robots, such as spherical robots
cannot function effectively on multiple terrains, especially
uneven and unknown ones. Thus, an efficient online adaptive algorithm that can rapidly obtain uncertainties online
and assist the robot in adapting to multiple terrains is required. In this article, we propose an adaptive model predictive control-based instruction planner (VAN-MPC) and a
multi-terrain trajectory tracking framework (VANMHH). The
VAN-MPC is composed of three components as follows. 1)
An adaptive dual-RBF neural network that online estimates
all uncertainties based on the adaptive law and composite error. 2) A model predictive controller with a control
Lyapunov function constraint. 3) The variable step-size algorithm for the adaptive controller to accelerate convergence and enhance stability. Without modifying the bottom
velocity and direction controllers, we finally develop the
multi-terrain trajectory tracking framework VANMHH just
by employing the new instruction planner VAN-MPC. The
practical experiments on multiple terrains demonstrate its
effectiveness and robustness.
Index Terms—Adaptive control, autonomous robots, mobile robots, optimal control.

I. INTRODUCTION
HE spherical robot is a special type of mobile robot that
has potential applications in a variety of fields, including
environmental detection, search and rescue, and security patrols.
Due to its unique mechanical structure, the robot has two major
advantages over conventional mobile robots such as wheeled
robots and legged robots [1], [2]. First, its closed spherical shell
can protect the interior electrical and mechanical framework

T

Received 22 April 2024; revised 7 November 2024; accepted 26
December 2024. Date of publication 13 February 2025; date of current
version 30 December 2025. Recommended by Technical Editor J. Zhao
and Senior Editor C. C. Cheah. This work was supported by the State
Key Laboratory of Industrial Control Technology, China, under Grant
ICT2024A21. (Corresponding author: You Wang.)
The authors are with the State Key Laboratory of Industrial Control Technology, Institute of Cyber Systems and Control, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou 310027, China (e-mail: yifanliu@zju.edu.cn;
hutao@zju.edu.cn; xiaoqing_guan@zju.edu.cn; yixuwang@zju.edu.cn;
bixuan_zhang@zju.edu.cn; king_wy@zju.edu.cn; guangli@zju.edu.cn).
Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TMECH.2025.3528106.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMECH.2025.3528106

from collision. Second, it has low frictional energy consumption
due to its spherical rolling mechanism. However, despite these
benefits, the spherical robot faces many challenges in the field
of control due to its nonlinear and underactuated characteristics.
Trajectory tracking control plays an important role for mobile
robots since it is the foundation for perfectly implementing the
task and plan. An accurate kinodynamic model of the spherical
robot can assist in the design of a highly effective controller.
And in our previous work in [3], a spherical robot’s trajectory
tracking framework is presented for indoor flat terrain [3]. This
control framework consists of three model-based controllers: a
velocity controller and a direction controller based on the robot’s
dynamic models, and a kinematic-based instruction planner to
publish velocity and direction command.
In practical applications, many tasks, such as environmental
detection, require robots that can operate effectively on multiple
terrains. Unfortunately, the lack of an efficient multi-terrain trajectory tracking algorithm has prevented spherical robots from
performing such tasks. What is preventing previous controllers
from operating well on multiple terrains? The previous control
framework employs the basic model, which is established on a
certain flat terrain with all the parameters known. But when the
robot goes on different terrains, the real model of the system
varies, leading to modeling disparity [2], [4]. The modeling
discrepancy between the actual environment system and the
basic model is referred to as uncertainties, which lead to the
failure of the previous control framework to function on multiple terrains [5]. These uncertainties are caused by unknown
variables, which cannot be perceived by spherical robots. And it
is impossible to acquire the unknown variables on all terrains
in advance, especially unknown terrains. There are multiple
unknown variables that can occur in both the kinematics and
the dynamics, which makes the problem more challenging and
complex. All in all, to achieve multi-terrain trajectory tracking,
it is necessary to develop an efficient adaptive control framework
for spherical robots that can effectively and rapidly deal with all
the uncertainties and multiple unknown variables online.
A. Related Works
In recent years, numerous works on the control of spherical robots have been published. Most research concentrates
on velocity control with the PID controller and sliding mode
controller (SMC). Then, an efficient velocity controller called

1083-4435 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html
for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: SOUTH CHINA UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on March 26,2026 at 07:24:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6786

Fig. 1.

IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS, VOL. 30, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

Control scheme of MHH.

hierarchical SMC (HSMC) and an effective direction controller
called hierarchical terminal SMC (HTSMC) are proposed by
us [3]. With an MPC-based instruction planner, we establish the
trajectory tracking framework MHH (MPC-HSMC-HTSMC),
which is the state of the art [3]. Fig. 1 illustrates the framework.
However, MHH can only be used on certain flat tiled terrain without considering uncertainties. And uncertainties may affect all
three controllers in the hierarchical framework simultaneously.
Uncertainty problems and multi-terrain control are important
research fields in robotics, such as autonomous ground vehicles,
manipulators, and surface vehicles [6], [7]. In [8], they employ a
Gaussian process regression to estimate the uncertainties in the
manipulator’s dynamics and integrate the torque compensation
with the feedback linearization controller. For multi-terrain control of quadrupedal robotics, [9] uses an effective exteroceptive
and proprioceptive perception method and employs RL to train
robots across various terrains. However, their foot sensors can
detect terrain quite effectively, whereas the spherical robot has
no such ability [10].
In recent years, MPC has been trying to solve the motion
control problems of robots and can achieve efficient results in
trajectory tracking control of robots [11], [12]. Several adaptive
MPC algorithms are presented to deal with the control system’s
uncertainties. In [13], they propose a set-membership-based
parameter estimator to learn the uncertain parameter in MPC’s
model. In [14], they enhance their previous MPC with an uncertainties’ estimation matrix and a control Lyapunov function
(CLF). This method can guarantee the stability of the MPC
while estimating uncertainties. Moreover, its pivotal regressor
and the skew-symmetry matrix for uncertainties derive from the
properties of the dynamic model [15].
Some studies employ the radial basis function neural network
(RBFNN) to represent models and uncertainties due to its advantages of fast convergence speed [16]. In our previous work [2],
we propose an adaptive velocity controller by simply combining
the results from an adaptive RBFNN controller and the HSMC
controller. It solely concentrates on the velocity control error
rather than estimating the actual uncertainty, and such a greedylike method can easily cause oscillations in complex systems.
Compared with that, we employ an actor–critic structure with the
updated VAN-MPC policy that provides optimal solutions based
on the updated model and uncertainties. Furthermore, in the
multi-terrain trajectory tracking problem, we need to take into
account the uncertainties in the whole dynamics and kinematics
and analyze how these uncertainties affect each controller within
the hierarchical trajectory tracking control framework.
There are several studies that combine MPC and RBFNN or
other networks. Compared with our method, [17] uses RBFNN
as an independent controller and simply combines the results

of MPC and RBFNN, which would lose the optimality of MPC.
Zhang et al. [18] designs two observers to obtain uncertainties in
kinematics, and a kinematics-based MPC is proposed without
stability constraints. There are also some studies that employ
RBFNN as a predictive model for MPC with online learning
strategies [19], [20]. However, these studies ignore the effect
of online model adaptation on MPC’s stability and only consider the dynamic model’s uncertainty. Several studies combine
Lyapunov function and NN-based MPC [21], [22], [23]. These
studies utilize Lyapunov function to enhance the robustness and
safety of the system or guarantee closed-loop stability. And NN
is employed to learn the system’s model, model mismatch, or
MPC policy using either offline or online data through machine
learning methods. Compared with that, we design a CLF with
the uncompensated uncertainties and the composite error, which
can not only ensure stability but also provide the adaptive law
to online estimate the uncertainties with adaptive methods. In
addition, the majority of studies contain only simulation results.
Furthermore, the adaptive method-based studies mentioned previously only consider the trajectory tracking error and assume
this error is the result of uncertainties. However, this method
may waste the optimality of MPC since the updated model is
not approaching the real model. It may cause oscillations and
overshoots when the tracking error gets smaller. In contrast, we
design a composite error to learn the real uncertainties with the
uncertain state error and to assure convergence with the tracking
error. Our adaptive algorithm’s structure has similarities to the
model-based reinforcement learning algorithm and can fully
exploit the benefits of MPC and adaptive RBFNN [24].
Besides that, previous adaptive controllers have the same
adaptive speed throughout the entire control process, creating
a tradeoff between overshoot and convergence speed. This inspires us to devise a variable step-size algorithm for adaptive
controllers, such as the SGD family in learning algorithms,
which may change step-size while training [25], [26]. In our
previous work [2], a step-size changing algorithm is designed for
RBFNN-based HSMC. However, this algorithm is determined
by SMC’s sliding surface, thus cannot be employed by other
RBFNN-based adaptive controllers. In this work, we propose
a novel variable step-size algorithm that is self-determined by
RBFNN, thus can be directly applied to all of the RBFNN-based
adaptive controllers.
B. Contributions
The uncertainties contain multiple unknown variables and
occur in both dynamics and kinematics. They vary with terrains
and can affect all three controllers in the hierarchical tracking framework. To reduce the burden of online estimation for
uncertainties, we convert all of the uncertainties with multiple
unknown variables into single command compensations through
a series of derivations, which can then be represented by a
dual-RBFNN. Next, we propose an adaptive instruction planner
VAN-MPC to deal with all of the converted uncertainties and
achieve the multi-terrain control capability, eliminating the need
to modify the bottom controllers. This algorithm is very convenient for migrating applications, as it allows the robot to achieve

Authorized licensed use limited to: SOUTH CHINA UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on March 26,2026 at 07:24:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: ADAPTIVE MPC-BASED MULTI-TERRAIN TRAJECTORY TRACKING FRAMEWORK FOR MOBILE SPHERICAL ROBOTS

multi-terrain control capability in a single step by modifying
solely the instruction planning layer.
Different from other Lyapunov-based MPCs with NN methods, we employ the Lyapunov function to derive an adaptive
law for the online weight updates of our dual-RBFNN while
simultaneously establishing a CLF constraint for the VAN-MPC
to assure stability and convergence. The composite error is utilized in VAN-MPC to learn the actual uncertainties in the system
online, which can enhance the system’s stability while ensuring
convergence. Besides, we propose the variable step-size algorithm for the adaptive Dual-RBFNN during the weights updating procedure, which significantly accelerates convergence
and improves stability. Since the variable step-size algorithm
is self-determined by RBFNN, it can be directly applied to all
adaptive controllers that employ RBFNN as the approximation
function. Finally, the efficient multi-terrain trajectory tracking
control framework VANMHH is proposed. Experiments on multiple terrains also confirmed its efficiency. Specifically, this study
makes the following contributions.
1) Uncertainties in the whole system are converted into
the command compensations, which are then represented
with the dual-RBFNN. This conversion can greatly reduce
the number of unknown variables to be estimated, thus
simplifying the problem. In addition, it allows the robot
to achieve multi-terrain control capability by modifying
solely the instruction planning layer.
2) We propose the adaptive instruction planner VAN-MPC to
achieve multi-terrain trajectory tracking control for spherical robots. Multi-terrain control can be accomplished
by learning the uncertainties in the system online. The
composite error-based Lyapunov function is designed
for VAN-MPC to ensure stability and accelerate convergence. Based on the Lyapunov function, the adaptive
law is developed for the online weight updates of our
dual-RBFNN, while the CLF constraint is formulated to
ensure the stability of the VAN-MPC.
3) The variable step-size algorithm designed for the adaptive
controller can accelerate convergence and enhance stability. Being self-determined by RBFNN, it can be directly
utilized in all adaptive controllers that employ RBFNN.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section II
discusses the uncertain problem. Section III presents the adaptive algorithm for multi-terrain tracking control. In Section IV,
practical experiments are carried out, results and comparisons
are given. Finally, Section V concludes this article.
II. PROBLEM FORMULATION
The spherical robot is driven by a two-DOF heavy pendulum,
and the mechanical schematic of the robot can be seen in Fig. 2.
Two motors are employed to achieve the robot’s locomotion.
In our previous work, we have proposed an efficient hierarchical trajectory tracking framework MHH for certain flat tiled
floor [3]. Fig. 1 illustrates the framework of MHH. However,
on different terrains, especially uneven terrains, MHH’s control
effect will be drastically decreased due to the uncertainties in
both kinematics and dynamics. These uncertainties arise from

6787

Fig. 2. Mechanical schematic of the spherical robot. The frame OXY
is the world frame where O is the frame origin. And O’X’Y’Z’ is the local
frame centered on the robot O’.
TABLE I
LIST OF NOMENCLATURE

various unknown variables, such as the inclination angle of the
ground, external impact, and friction torque, which cannot be
perceived by spherical robots. In this section, the uncertainties
and multiple unknown variables will be extracted from the model
and then represented with input compensations, which greatly
reduces the pressure of estimating uncertainties.
A. Uncertainties in the Dynamics Model
The dynamic model on multiple terrains can be derived from
the Euler–Lagrange method, with symbols defined in Table I and
frame on O’X’Y’Z’. After extracting terms containing unknown
parameters (ΔΦd , ϑf , ϑl , Δτep , Δτer ) with Taylor polynomial,
we can get the following dynamic model:


M̂ (q) + ΔM (q) q̈ + N̂ (q, q̇) + ΔN (q, q̇) = Eτ
(1)
where q is the state matrix in [3]. M̂ ∈ R4×4 and N̂ ∈ R4 are
basic inertia matrix and nonlinear matrix, respectively, with all of
their elements being observable. ΔM ∈ R4×4 and ΔN are matrices of uncertainties, with each element containing unknown
variables. What is more, several elements in the matrices are
listed in the following, whereas the rest of the elements are all
0:
M̂11 = Imp + Ifp + ml2 , M̂12 = M̂21 = ml cos α
M̂22 = M +

Iy tan2 qr
Isp
+
, M̂33 = Imr + ml2
R2 cos2 (qr )
R2

M̂34 = M̂43 = mRl cos β, M̂44 = Isr + If r + M R2

Authorized licensed use limited to: SOUTH CHINA UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on March 26,2026 at 07:24:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6788

IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS, VOL. 30, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

ΔM12 = ΔM21 = mlϑf sin α,

u = [v qr ]T are the states and inputs of the system. X, Y , and
φ, respectively, represent its coordinates and yaw angle in the
global frame OXY in Fig. 2. The kinematic model on multiple
terrains can be seen in (4), which can also be decomposed into
the basic model and uncertainties Δδ ∈ R3

ΔM34 = ΔM43 = mRlϑl sin(β)
ΔN2 = M g sin ϑf +

Iy q˙r Δφd
+ mlα̇2 ϑf cos α + Δτep
R cos2 (qr )

ΔN4 = M gR sin ϑl −

Iy vΔφd
+ mRlβ̇ 2 ϑl cos(β) + Δτer
R cos2 (qr )

N̂ =
⎡



⎤
v
mgl sin α cos β + ζ α̇ + R cos
qr
⎢
⎥


⎢ 2(Isp +Iy )vq˙r sin qr
⎥
v
2
+
F
−
ml
α̇
sin
α
+
ζ
α̇
+
R
⎢
⎥
2 cos3 (q )
f
p
R
R
cos
q
r
⎢
⎥
 r

⎢
⎥
mgl cos α sin β + ζ β̇ + q˙r
⎢
⎥
⎣
⎦


2
(Iy +Isp )v sin qr
2
− mRlβ̇ sin β + ζ β̇ + q˙r + Ff r R
− R2 cos3 qr

1
E=
0

1
0

0
1

0
1

T

,τ =

τv
.
τr

The dynamic model is employed to design the model-based
torque controllers to track the desired velocity vd and roll angle
command qrd from MPC. Define the control law of the velocity controller HSMC and the direction controller HTSMC as
τv (q, q̇, vd |dynamic) and τr (q, q̇, qrd |dynamic), respectively.
Obviously, both the control laws of HSMC and HTSMC are
solely determined by the current states, desired command, and
the dynamic model. When the current states (q, q̇) are determined, we can adjust the control torque by adjusting vd and qrd ,
according to authors in [3] and [27]. Therefore, we can make
the following derivation to transform the uncertainties in the
dynamics into the compensation of the command.
First, employ the basic matrices M̂ and N̂ to establish a basic
dynamic model in (2) that is free of uncertainties
M̂ (q) q̈ + N̂ (q, q̇) = E τ̂ .

(2)

Then, the effect of the uncertainties in the dynamics on HSMC
and HTSMC can be converted into command compensation
ΔuD = ΔvdD

D
Δqrd

T

, where



τv (q, q̇, vd |(1))
τv q, q̇, vd + ΔvdD |(2)

 .
=
D
|(2)
τr (q, q̇, qrd |(1))
τr q, q̇, qrd + Δqrd

(3)

One simplified example is given to help with understanding.
Assuming that the designed velocity vd is 1.0 m/s, the robot
may only reach 0.8 m/s after being controlled by the estimated
model-based velocity controller due to the presence of uncertainties. Therefore, the vd should be 1.0 m/s rather than 0.8 m/s
if you want the robot’s actual velocity to be 0.8 m/s. Finally, the
uncertainties and multiple unknown variables are simplified to
be two compensations.
B. Uncertainties in the Kinematic Model and the System
The kinematics is utilized to design the instruction planner
to track the reference trajectory. Define x = [X Y φ]T and

ẋ = f (x, u) = f̂ (x, u) − Δδ s.t. dynamics in (1)
⎤
⎤ ⎡
⎡
v cos ϑg · cos φ
v · cos φ
⎥
⎥ ⎢
⎢
= ⎣ v cos ϑg · sin φ ⎦ = ⎣ v · sin φ ⎦ − fˆu × ΔuK
v tan qr /R − ΔΦK
v tan qr /R
(4)
where ϑg is the inclination angle of the ground in the robot’s
yaw direction, which can be determined with (ϑf , ϑl , φ). ΔΦK
is the uncertainties in the angular velocity of the yaw angle,
which is unknown and related to the impact torque in the yaw
direction Δτey and θg . f and f̂ are the real and basic kinematic
model. Restricted by the structure of the spherical robot, the
robot cannot keep rotating in the direction of the roll angle. And
the X, Y and their derivatives are primarily determined by v.
Thus we adopt the same simplified
basic kinematics in [3]. What

∂ f̂ 
as fˆu and ΔuK represents the
is more, we abbreviate ∂u

x,u

uncertainties in the kinematic model as follows:
ΔuK =

(1 − cos θg ) · v
.
ΔΦk · R cos2 qr /v − sin qr cos qr · (1 − cos θg )

After optimal commands v and qr are determined from the
instruction planner, two model-based torque controllers execute
the command based on the dynamic model and control laws.
According to (3), to enable the two torque controllers to provide
adequate torque with the basic dynamics in (2), we incorporate
the ΔuD into the (4), thus we can get
ẋ = f (x, u) = f̂ (x, u − ΔuD ) − fˆu × ΔuK s.t. (2).
(5)
At present, all of the uncertainties have been included in the
kinematic model. However, the existing phrase is too complex
and lacks sufficient intuitiveness. In addition, ΔuD is inside the
nonlinear model f̂ (·), which makes it challenging to cope with.
Then, we derive the following:
ẋ = f (x, u) ≈ f̂ (x, u) − fˆu × ΔuD − fˆu × ΔuK . (6)
Define ΔuD + ΔuK = Δu ∈ R2 , then the final kinematic
model containing the uncertainties is shown as follows:
ẋ = f (x, u, Δu) = f̂ (x, u) − fˆu Δu

(7)

where fˆu Δu is the term representing all of the uncertainties in the system. Since fˆu is known, we finally define Δu = [Δv Δqr ]T as the uncertainties in the kinodynamics for convenience. Though Δu is actually unknown,
we can use one neural network to represent it and update
its value online to approach the real value. Furthermore,
the number of Δu is significantly smaller compared to the
number of unknown variables, hence greatly simplifying the
challenges.

Authorized licensed use limited to: SOUTH CHINA UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on March 26,2026 at 07:24:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: ADAPTIVE MPC-BASED MULTI-TERRAIN TRAJECTORY TRACKING FRAMEWORK FOR MOBILE SPHERICAL ROBOTS

6789

shown in Fig. 5
Δu ≈ Γd2m (h (χ) W ∗ ) = Γ

(8)

0
1
0 0
0
A
+
A
(9)
0
0
0 1
1


χ − cj 2Ok
hkj (χ) = exp −
; k = 0, 1; j = 0, 1, . . ., 2m
b2j
(10)
⎧
⎨diag o0 1 − o0 0 0 , 0 < o0 < 1; k = 0
Ok =
⎩diag 0 0 o1 1 − o1 , 0 < o1 < 1; k = 1

d2m(A) =

Fig. 3. Control scheme of VAN-MPC. Variables are described in the
following sections.

h 1 W1
h 2 W2

1
0

(11)
where W ∗ ∈ R(2m+1)×2 is the ideal network weights, and
W ∗ = W 1 , W 2 . Here, we assume that the approximation error of (8) could be negligible with the idea weights
W ∗ . In addition, h(·) ∈ R2×(2m+1) is the Gaussian radial basis
Fig. 4.

Multi-terrain trajectory tracking framework VANMHH.

functions, and h(·) = h1 ; h2 . Γ = diag Γ1 , Γ2 is the
weight scale coefficients of the two subnetworks. Calculation
details of d2m(·) can be seen in (9). cj and bj are the center
vector and the width of the hidden layer, respectively. And
cj =

Fig. 5.

Structure of our dual-RBFNN.

III. CONTROL ALGORITHM
In this section, first, a dual-RBFNN is proposed to represent
all of the uncertainties in Section III-A. To enable multi-terrain
trajectory tracking, we then propose the adaptive AN-MPC to
replace the previous instruction planner MPC in Section III-B.
Furthermore, a corresponding variable step-size algorithm is
provided for the adaptive law to accelerate the adaptation process
and maintain stability. With the above-mentioned variable stepsize algorithm, a more efficient instruction planner VAN-MPC
is developed in Section III-C. With VAN-MPC, the previous
HSMC and HTSMC, we finally propose the multi-terrain trajectory tracking framework VANMHH. The schemes of the VANMPC and VANMHH can be seen in Figs. 3 and 4, respectively.
Details about the algorithm are provided as follows.
A. Uncertainties and the Dual-RBFNN
According to (7), the unknown term Δu = [Δv Δqr ]T
refers to the command compensation utilized to represent the
uncertainties in the whole system. To fit the unknown uncertainties Δu, we design a special multiple-input and multiple-output
dual-RBFNN as follows. The structure of the Dual-RBFNN is

j−m
m

j−m
m

j−m
m

j−m
m

T

.

χ ∈ R4×1 represents the network’s input matrix, while o0 and
o1 are employed to regulate the significant weights of the input.
Details about the input χ will be provided as follows.
The selection of the input matrix χ is essential for the dualRBFNN’s fitting effect. To select the suitable input matrix, we
may simulate the entire control cycle from time tk to time tk+1
and identify key components of χk+1 at time tk+1 . Assume
the initial states and inputs of the system at time tk are xk
and uk , respectively. In addition, the current estimated network
weight and uncertainties at this moment are, respectively, Ŵ k
k = Δv
k 
and Δu
Δqr k . And define the adaptive instruction
planner’s policy is ΠŴk (xk ). With initial states and inputs, we
can predict the future states in the following predictive horizon
T , using ΠŴk (xk ), and the estimated states in the future after
the moment tk are defined as x(t|k), 0 < t ≤ T . However, due
to the discrepancy between Ŵ k and Wk , the actual states in
the next step xk+1 may not match the estimated value x(dt|k).
Fig. 6 demonstrates the above-mentioned situations.
If the step time dt is small enough, the path can be reduced to a
straight line connecting two neighboring coordinate points. According to Fig. 6, the difference between real and estimated mov k while the
ing distance dAB and dAC is connected to Δv − Δv
yaw angle distance φk+1 − φ(dt|k) is related to Δqr − 
Δqr k ,
k
according to (7). In addition, according to (7), u(0|k) − Δu
O
O
should gradually converge to uO
k+1 = vk+1 qr(k+1) which
is denoted as the actual velocity and roll angle obtained through
observation at time tk+1 . Thus, the appropriate input matrix

Authorized licensed use limited to: SOUTH CHINA UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on March 26,2026 at 07:24:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6790

IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS, VOL. 30, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

Fig. 6. Uncompensated uncertainties’ impact in one control cycle. A
is the robot’s initial position at time tk . An estimation is made at this
moment that the estimated position in one step time dt is C, based on
the given control instruction. However, the robot arrives B at time tk+1
due to the uncompensated uncertainties.

Fig. 7. Comparison between the architecture of AN-MPC and actor–
critic algorithm. (a) Actor–critic. (b) AN-MPC.

χk+1 can be developed as follows:

χk+1 = MaxAbs ∂ dˆk+1 ∂v̂k+1

T

∂ φ̂k+1



∂ q̂r(k+1)

can provide the optimal control policy. And its main emphasis
is on accurately adjusting the trajectory curve and preventing
oscillations and overshoots from occurring. Conversely, the E r
accounts for a small proportion, and it works when the distance
between the robot and the reference trajectory is large. This
portion is dedicated to enabling the robot to quickly approach
the reference trajectory.
Following the prior preparations, the control iteration of the
adaptive planner, AN-MPC, can be presented as below, which
can also be seen in Algorithm 1. First, in each iteration, we
update the network weight Ŵ (k) of the uncertainties according
˙
to the adaptive law Ŵ T in (13). A simplified way is to use the
˙
approximation: Ŵ (k) ≈ Ŵ (k − 1) + Ŵ T · dt. Second, with
k , which represents
the updated Ŵ (k), we can calculate the Δu
the estimated uncertainty at time tk , using the (14)
⎤
⎡
T
T ˆ
˙ T
Ŵ
⎢Γ1 E c f u h1 O ⎥
˙
Ŵ T = ˙ 1 = − ⎣
(13)
T⎦
T
Ŵ 2
Γ2 E Tc fˆu O h2


k = Γ · d2m h (χk ) Ŵ (k) .
(14)
Δu
k into the following adaptive instruction
Next, substitute the Δu
planner AN-MPC. Finally, we can obtain the optimal command
by solving the optimization problem
 T
2 


k − uref 
x − xref 2Q + u − Δu
dt
min J(·) =

u(·)

(12)
where MaxAbs(·) is the max-abs normalization function and
∂ dˆk+1 = dAB − dAC
O
k
∂v̂k+1 = vk+1
− v(0|k) + Δv

∂ φ̂k+1 = φk+1 − φ(dt|k)
O
 rk .
∂ q̂r(k+1) = qr(k+1)
− qr (0|k) + Δq

R

0



k
s.t. ẋ(t|k) = f x(t|k), u(t|k), Δu



(15)
(15a)

x(0|k) = xk , x(t|k) ∈ [xk − xmax , xk + xmax ]
(15b)
k , umax + Δu
k
(15c)
u(t|k) ∈ umin + Δu


˙ [−1] , ẋref ≥ 0
k , E e , E r , x̂
Hclf xk , uk , Δu
(15d)

B. Adaptive Instruction Planner: AN-MPC
Prior to introducing the adaptive instruction planner, we must
clarify two types of state errors. The first are the uncertain
state errors E e = xk − x(dt|k − 1), which will approach 0
when Ŵ k approaches its true value. And the second are the
trajectory tracking state errors E r with regard to the reference
trajectory xref . Furthermore, we also define a composite error
E c = γE e + (1 − γ)E r , 0.5 < γ < 1.0 to be applied in the
adaptive portion. In addition, E c can be regarded as part of the
reward function in RL, and the AN-MPC algorithm may have
similarities with actor–critic algorithms [28]. Fig. 7 displays
a comparison between the architecture of AN-MPC and the
actor–critic algorithm. E c can absorb the advantages of E e
and E r , respectively, at different stages. Specifically, E e can
enhance the optimality, whereas E r can accelerate the convergence of trajectory tracking. The former can assist in learning
the true uncertainties as well as the model; hence, the AN-MPC

where Q and R are definite weighting coefficient matrix. xref
and uref are reference trajectory and reference inputs, respectively. Equation (15a) is the adaptive kinematic model in (7).
Initial states and inputs are defined as xk and uk , respectively, which are obtained by sensors. xmax > 0 is the maximum
distance the robot can go during a predictive horizon. And
˙ [−1] = ẋ(dt|k − 1) is the derivative of the state at tk which
x̂
is predicted by the previous control loop k − 1. ẋref specifically
refers to the derivative of the reference trajectory at time tk .
The inequality constraint (15d) is the CLF constraint, with the
function Hclf (·) as follows:
˙ [−1]
k + γE Te x̂
Hclf = −E Tc f̂ (·) − fˆu Δu
1
+ (1 − γ)E Tr ẋref − E Tc KE c
2

(16)

where K ∈ R3×3 is the positive diagonal matrix.

Authorized licensed use limited to: SOUTH CHINA UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on March 26,2026 at 07:24:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: ADAPTIVE MPC-BASED MULTI-TERRAIN TRAJECTORY TRACKING FRAMEWORK FOR MOBILE SPHERICAL ROBOTS

6791

be slowed down, allowing the algorithm to maintain a faster
convergence speed and a higher level of stability. Therefore,
we propose the variable step-size algorithm in the following
section.

Algorithm 1: AN-MPC.

C. Variable Step-Size Algorithm and VAN-MPC

Moreover, (15) does not depend on the specific implementation method (e.g., shooting, collocation, etc.). To simplify
the problem, we also consider a direct multiple shooting transcription for the (15) as follows. The control signal u(t|k) is
parameterized over subintervals of the horizon [0, T ] to create
N nodes with intervals of duration Δt = T /(N − 1) [29]. Then,
integrating the model in (15a) over an interval, and we can have
N states x(i|k), i ∈ [0, . . .N ], where
x(i + 1|k) = x(i|k)
 (i+1)Δt 

k dt.
f x(t|k), u(i|k), Δu
+
iΔt

The integral term can also be simplified using the Euler’s
˙ [−1] ≈ ẋ(1|k − 1)
method to expedite the optimization. And x̂
when dt = Δt. Furthermore, the loss function in (15) can be
transcribed as follows:
J(·) =

N


x(i|k) − xref 2Q

i=0

+

N
−1 


2

k − uref 
u(i|k) − Δu
 .

i=0

R

The overall process of the AN-MPC algorithm is presented
in Algorithm 1. And as for now, we have obtained the new
trajectory tracking framework ANMHH with the AN-MPC,
HSMC, and HTSMC. Moreover, experiments revealed that
the convergence time of the adaptive process varies among
terrains due to the varying magnitudes of uncertainties. We
anticipate that when the amount of uncompensated uncertaink − Δu| is large, the adaptive speed
ties’ absolute value |Δu
will be sped up, and when it is small, the adaptive speed will

We designed the variable step-size algorithm for the reasons
stated previously. And we discovered that the Γ has similar
properties to the step-size in machine learning, i.e., when Γ is
large, the learning speed of the uncertainties is fast but prone
to oscillation and overshoot, and when Γ is small, the learning
speed is slow but relatively stable. On the basis of this information, we plan to construct a variable step-size with Γ and modify
it to account for uncompensated uncertainty. The problem then
becomes determining which observations can characterize the
size of the uncompensated uncertainty.
The answer may be found in dual-RBFNN since the states
in dual-RBFNN’s input matrix χ is closely connected with
the uncompensated uncertainties. In addition, dual-RBFNN depends on the distance between χ and the center vector cj . We
then divide the size of the uncompensated uncertainties into
discrete 2m + 1 levels, and the number of the center vector with
the shortest distance represents the size of the uncompensated
uncertainties. Define ζk = ζkv ζkqr to represent the level of
k − Δu at time tk , and
uncompensated uncertainties Δu
⎧




⎪
v
2
⎪
χ − cj O0 − m /m
⎨ζk = arg min
j∈0,1,...,2m


(17)


⎪
qr
2
⎪
χ − cj O1 − m /m.
⎩ζk = arg min
j∈0,1,...,2m

However, this parameter ζk cannot be utilized directly in the
variable step-size algorithm since the introduction of new gradient propagation may impact the adaption laws and increase the
adaptive law’s index. To breakdown the gradient propagation,
we build a replay buffer B to record the newest multiple ζk and
use ζk instead
ζk = ζkv

ζkqr = E [ζi |ζi ∈ B] .

(18)

As stated previously, we anticipate that the amount of uncompenk − Δu| has a positive
sated uncertainties’ absolute value |Δu
correlation with the step-size. Since ζk is employed to represent
the amount of uncompensated uncertainties, the step-size Γ
should be proportional to the ζk ’s absolute value |ζk |. Actually,
there are numerous functions that meet this requirement. We
experimented with several functions before settling on quadratic
functions for the variable step-size algorithm. And the algorithm
we employ is presented as follows:
⎧
⎪
⎪Γ = diag Γ1 , Γ2
⎪
⎨


2
Γ1 = min av · ζkv + bv , cv
(19)
⎪


⎪
2
⎪
q
⎩Γ2 = min aq · ζ r + bq , cq
r
r
r
k

Authorized licensed use limited to: SOUTH CHINA UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on March 26,2026 at 07:24:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6792

IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS, VOL. 30, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

Fig. 8. Variable step-size algorithm, where Γk represents Γ1 and Γ2 .
ζk represents ζkv and ζkqr . And b stands for bv and bqr , while c stands
for cv and cqr .

Algorithm 2: VAN-MPC.

and [29], if V̇ ≤ −Q, E e and E r will gradually converges to 0.
E e converges to 0 also means that the uncertainties have been
fully obtained according to Section III-A and III-B. Moreover,
the presence of E r in V and Q also aids in accelerating the
convergence of the tracking problem. The inequality equation
V̇ ≤ −Q will be demonstrated as follows.
For the sake of brevity, define I1,0 T = 1 0 and I0,1 T =
1 . Then, we can get the derivative of V as follows:
 T 
˙
 W

V̇ = γE Te Ė e + (1 − γ)E Tr E˙ r + tr W
0

= E Tc f̂ (·) − fˆu Γd2m (hW ∗ ) − (1 − γ)E Tr ẋref


˙
˙
˙ [−1] + I1,0 T W
 T Ŵ
 T Ŵ
I1,0 + I0,1 T W
I0,1 .
− γE Te x̂
(22)
 . Since d2m(A + B) =
Replace the W ∗ with Ŵ − W
T
 ) = h1 W
 1 h2 W
2 ,
d2m(A) + d2m(B), and d2m(hW
we can get



V̇ = E Tc f̂ (·) − fˆu Γd2m hŴ − (1 − γ)E Tr ẋref


˙ T 
T ˙
T ˆ h1
− γE e x̂[−1] + Γ1 E c f u
+ Ŵ 1 W 1
O


˙ T 
T ˆ O
+ Γ2 E c f u
(23)
+ Ŵ 2 W 2 .
h2

where av , bv , cv and aqr , bqr , cqr are both positive values that
can influence the variation range and speed of the step-size. Its
schematic diagram is shown in Fig. 8.
Replacing the constant value Γ in AN-MPC with the variable
step-size algorithm in (19), we finally obtain the more efficient
and robust instruction planner VAN-MPC. Algorithm 2 describes the overall process of the VAN-MPC algorithm. Cooperating with the previous velocity controller HSMC and direction
controller HTSMC, the multi-terrain trajectory tracking control
framework VANMHH is accomplished. Compared with MHH,
multi-terrain control purpose is achieved just by optimizing a
single component (the instruction planner), which is considerably very convenient.
D. Stability Analysis
The ideal network weights are W ∗ which can perfectly
match the uncertainties Δu, whereas the estimated network
 = Ŵ −
weights are Ŵ . Now we define weights’ errors W
 ) and
W ∗ . Construct the Lyapunov-like function V (E e , E r , W
a quadratic equation Q(E c ), which can be seen as follows:
1−γ T
1 T 
γ
W
(20)
E r E r + tr W
V (·) = E Te E e +
2
2
2
1
Q(·) = E Tc KE c .
(21)
2
Obviously Q(0) = 0 and limE c →∞ Q(E c ) = ∞. In addition,
V (·) is the Lyapunov-like function. Accordings to works in [14]

Substitute the adaptive law (13) into (23), and we can get


V̇ = E Tc f̂ (·) − fˆu Γd2m hŴ − (1 − γ)E Tr ẋref
˙ [−1] .
− γE Te x̂

(24)

Thus, the equation V̇ ≤ −Q is equivalent to the constraint (15d)
or (16). After adding this inequality constraint to the (15),
stability is guaranteed during the control process.
What is more, in order to verify whether the set of the constraint (15d) is empty, we designed the following optimization
problem with Ξ representing the robot’s reachable set. By using
the traversal technique and adjusting the parameters, we can
obtain = 0, which indicates that for every state within the
k−1
≥ 0 is satisfied,
robot’s reachable set, if the condition Hclf
k
then there will always be a u0 in the value set that can make
constraint (15d) feasible
k−1
(ϑk ) > 0.
= max min Hclf (uk , ϑk ) s.t. Hclf
uk ∈U

ϑk ∈Ξ

(25)

With the above-mentioned lemma, we can prove its recursive feasibility as follows. Assume (15) is feasible in the
previous control loop at time tk−1 , with the optimal sok−1
lution U k−1 = [uk−1
0 , . . ., uN −1 ] under the estimated uncer
tainties Δu
k−1 . Then, we can always find a candidate solution at time tk , i.e., U k = [ukclf , uk−1
+ Δ, . . ., uk−1
2
N −1 +
k+N −1
k
k ] where uclf = argmaxu ∈(15c) Hclf (uk , ∼
Δ, u
+ Δu
ref

k



k − Δu
), Δ = Δu
k−1 , and Δuk is the estimated uncertainties

Authorized licensed use limited to: SOUTH CHINA UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on March 26,2026 at 07:24:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: ADAPTIVE MPC-BASED MULTI-TERRAIN TRAJECTORY TRACKING FRAMEWORK FOR MOBILE SPHERICAL ROBOTS

6793

Fig. 10. Insert artificial uncertainties into the experiments to observe
the uncertainties’ convergence process. The area enclosed by the
dashed line represents the module of artificial uncertainties inserted
during the experiments in Section IV.A. Δu = [Δv Δqr ] represents
the true value of the uncertainties.

Fig. 9. Terrains for experiments. (a) Flat tiled floor. (b) Rubber ground.
(c) Ground with hollow tiles. (d) Grass. (e) Varied terrain.

at time tk . Based on the above-mentioned explanation, ukclf can
−1
∈ [umin , umax ],
satisfy both the (15c) and (15d). When uk+N
ref
k+N −1

uref
+ Δuk will satisfy the (15c). Moreover, uk−1
+Δ
i
is feasible at time tk−1 .
also satisfies the (15c) since uk−1
i
Therefore, the candidate solution U k is feasible when U k−1
−1
is feasible and uk+N
∈ [umin , umax ].
ref

Fig. 11. Experiment on flat tiled floor with no artificial uncertainties.
(a) Real path. (b) Tracking distance.

IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
In this section, we pretend to prove that our instruction planner
VAN-MPC and trajectory tracking framework VANMHH can
function efficiently on multiple terrains without prior knowledge
of the terrains. Three more planners and their tracking frameworks are used for comparison, i.e., MPC and its framework
MHH; two AN-MPCs with a large or small step-size (which
are denoted by AN-MPC-L and AN-MPC-S, respectively) and
their framework ANMHH. In addition, the spherical robot’s
base model is obtained on a flat tiled floor in Fig. 9(a). All
the algorithms run in concurrent threads on a mini PC (Intel
i7-8559 U, 2.70 GHz, Quad-core 64-bit).
Five terrains are selected as shown in Fig. 9. In Section A,
the robot will track a sine-wave trajectory on the flat tiled floor,
where artificial uncertainties are introduced to quantify the effect
of the algorithms. The following three terrains are used for
tracking experiments in Section B. And on the last terrain, the
robot transits from rubber ground to grass while tracking a Lemniscate of Gerono. In addition, N = 10, Q = diag[2 2 1],
R = diag[1 1.5]. The variable step-size algorithm’s hyperparameter values for VAN-MPC is (av , bv , cv ; aqr , bqr , cqr ) =
(8, 0.3, 1.5; 0.3, 0.06, 0.15), while the constant step-size for
AN-MPC (small step-size) and AN-MPC (large step-size) is
Γ = (0.5, 0.1) and Γ = (1.0, 0.1), respectively. Furthermore,
CasADi framework and IPOPT are employed to solve the nonlinear program [30], [31].
A. Flat Terrain With Artificial Uncertainties
In reality, the uncertainties on different terrains are unknown,
and can vary with inputs, states, and the terrains’ ups and
downs, making it impossible to conduct quantitative analyses
and determine whether our estimated uncertainties converge to
the true value. Thus, we hope to create artificial uncertainties and

Fig. 12. Experiment on flat tiled floor with Δu = [0.2v
path. (b) Tracking distance.

0]. (a) Real

Fig. 13. Experiment on flat tiled floor with Δu = [0.4v
path. (b) Tracking distance.

0]. (a) Real

incorporate them into experiments to observe the convergence
process. Since terrain Fig. 9(a) is highly unique and should
theoretically be devoid of uncertainties, we apply artificial uncertainties to this place. The possible way is to insert a module
between the instruction planner and the bottom controllers, such
as Fig. 10. In this experiment, we employ Δu = [Δv 0] =
[ξ · v 0] as the artificial uncertainties that will vary with the
command. And we hope to examine the convergence process of
the estimated uncertainties.
Results of the experiments are shown in Figs. 11–14, where
green array represents the initial position and direction. To
better compare the control effects, the following indicators were
chosen. 1) Rise time tr when the distance falls below 0.2 m for
the first time. 2) Mean value of the distance dm . 3) Mean distance
after rising time dmr . 4) The value of the first peak in the distance

Authorized licensed use limited to: SOUTH CHINA UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on March 26,2026 at 07:24:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6794

IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS, VOL. 30, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

Fig. 14. Relative errors of the estimated uncertainties which indicate
the convergence process of the estimated uncertainties. (a) Δv = 0.2v.
(b) Δv = 0.4v.

Fig. 15. Experiment with artificial uncertainties and large initial distance. The composite error E c with larger γ has the best performance.
(a) Real path. (b) Tracking distance.

TABLE II
TRAJECTORY TRACKING UNDER ARTIFICIAL UNCERTAINTIES

Fig. 16. Experiment on rubber ground. (a) Real path. (b) Tracking
distance.

curve dfp , which can indicate the learning speed of the uncertainties in the initial stage. 5) and 6) Root-mean-square error
(RMSE) values of the estimated uncertainties’ error boundaries
 and 
ermsv and ermsq for Δv
Δqr , respectively. 7) Uncertainty
rising time tre which is the time when the relative error of
uncertainties first becomes zero. 8) RMSE of uncertainties’
relative error ermser . 9) Mean computation time tc results are
shown in Table II.
When there are no uncertainties, each of the four frameworks
can effectively work according to Fig. 11. And it can be seen that
the VAN-MPC and AN-MPC can slow the increase in distance
and reduce the error faster. When artificial uncertainties are
inserted, according to Figs. 12–14 and Table II, their effects vary
widely. MPC cannot work in such situations with the largest
distances, while VAN-MPC has the best tracking effect with
small tr , dm , dmr , and dfp . VAN-MPC can reduce tracking error
and maintain stability rapidly, which is due to the fact that it
initially has a large step-size, but the step-size will progressively
decrease to maintain stability. According to Fig. 14, it is obvious
that VAN-MPC can converge quickly to the zero line at the
beginning with the smallest tre , and then keep stability with the
smallest ermser .
In addition, experiments are also carried out to verify
the performance of the composite error E c = γE e + (1 −
γ)E r , 0.5 < γ < 1 employed in VAN-MPC. Results can be
seen in Fig. 15. When the initial distance is large, the E r part
in E c can quickly shorten the distance, hence accelerating the
convergence of the trajectory tracking in comparison to relying
just on E e . However, if the distance is reduced and E r has large
proportion, it will result in oscillation and overshooting. At this
time, the larger the γ, which is the ratio of E e , the more stable
and optimal the system will be.

Fig. 17. Experiment on ground with hollow tiles. (a) Real path.
(b) Tracking distance.

Fig. 18.

Experiment on grass. (a) Real path. (b) Tracking distance.

B. Experiments on Multiple Terrains
In this section, we carry out trajectory tracking experiments
on three terrains in Fig. 9(b)–(d). Due to the absence of the
uncertainties’ true value, we consider the entire system to be
a black box and evaluate the algorithms based on the distance
curves. Results of the experiments are shown in Figs. 16–18.
Results of indicators can be seen in Table III. According to
the results, VAN-MPC has a much better control effect than
the others on multiple terrains. On rubber terrain, the uncertainties are relatively small, and MPC can help progressively
reduce the distance. But the uncertainties will change with
the desired commands, causing the distance curve to fluctuate
accordingly. However, MPC is unable to manage situations
with large uncertainties, such as the ground with hollow tiles

Authorized licensed use limited to: SOUTH CHINA UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on March 26,2026 at 07:24:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: ADAPTIVE MPC-BASED MULTI-TERRAIN TRAJECTORY TRACKING FRAMEWORK FOR MOBILE SPHERICAL ROBOTS

TABLE III
TRAJECTORY TRACKING ON MULTIPLE TERRAINS

6795

still capable of maintaining an effective trajectory tracking effect
on varied terrain.
V. CONCLUSION

Fig. 19.
tance.

Experiment on varied terrain. (a) Real path. (b) Tracking dis-

and grass. In contrast, other planners with estimated uncertainties can decrease the distance more quickly, particularly
VAN-MPC, which can stop the rise in distance the quickest
with the smallest dfp on all three terrains. As a result of its large
step-size in the initial stage, VAN-MPC also has a small tr .
When the distance or uncompensated uncertainties increase, the
step-size of VAN-MPC may increase quickly and then decrease
to maintain stability and have the smallest dmr and dm . This
makes the trajectory tracking control framework VANMHH
equipped with VAN-MPC more robust and efficient, even for
rugged terrains. As for the AN-MPC (large step-size), due to
its constant large step-size, the estimated uncertainties fluctuate
violently. Although the estimated uncertainties of the AN-MPC
(small step-size) are comparatively stable and fluctuate less with
small ermsv and ermsq , they change so slowly that they cannot
adapt well to the changes in environmental uncertainties. The
two aforementioned factors cause the distance curves of the
two AN-MPC algorithms to vary. As a conclusion, VANMHH
equipped with VAN-MPC performs best on a variety of terrains
due to its superior stability, robustness, and response speed.
C. Experiments on Varied Terrain
Experiments on the varied terrain in Fig. 9(e) are conducted
here. The reference trajectory is a Lemniscate of Gerono. The
robot will transit from the rubber ground which is located on
the right to the grass. Experiment results are shown in Fig. 19.
According to Fig. 19, VAN-MPC has the best tracking performance, and when the terrain changes, it can also very effectively
eliminate the rise in distance so as to keep a stable and effective
following effect. Moreover, it is obvious that VAN-MPC has the
least global tracking error and the smallest tracking error on both
terrains. In conclusion, VANMHH equipped with VAN-MPC is

In this article, we develop an efficient control framework
VANMHH and its instruction planner VAN-MPC for the multiterrain trajectory tracking problem of spherical robots. This
new framework is developed by enhancing our previous MHH
framework, and offers multi-terrain capabilities by replacing
the former instruction planner MPC with VAN-MPC. All the
uncertainties in both kinematics and dynamics are restructured
into a single matrix, and a dual-RBFNN is proposed to fully
represent them. The CLF constraint is also applied to assure the
stability of the VAN-MPC while learning the weights of the dualRBFNN online. In addition, the variable step-size algorithm
designed for the dual-RBFNN can accelerate convergence and
enhance stability. Then, the updated VAN-MPC will solve the
new optimal problem in order to determine the ideal command,
which will be sent to HSMC and HTSMC. As a result, spherical
robots can track trajectories on multiple terrains effectively with
the VANMHH.
Then, five terrains are selected, and real-world experiments
are carried out to verify the control effect. First, we apply
different artificial uncertainties, and observe that the uncertainties can rapidly converge to the true values, and the framework has a great tracking effect in the presence of various
artificial uncertainties. Then, experiments on other terrains and
varied terrain demonstrate that the proposed method is very
effective and enables the spherical robot to achieve trajectory tracking on multiple terrains. And this study can help
spherical robots have broader applications. In the future, we
will conduct an in-depth study on spherical robots from the
perspective of task decision-making, so that spherical robots
can truly execute tasks, such as exploration and rescue in
the wild.
REFERENCES
[1] E. Kayacan, E. Kayacan, H. Ramon, and W. Saeys, “Adaptive neuro-fuzzy
control of a spherical rolling robot using sliding-mode-control-theorybased online learning algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 43, no. 1,
pp. 170–179, Feb. 2013.
[2] Y. Liu et al., “Multi-terrain velocity control of the spherical robot by online
obtaining the uncertainties in the dynamics,” IEEE Robot. Automat. Lett.,
vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 2732–2739, Apr. 2022.
[3] Y. Liu et al., “Direction and trajectory tracking control for nonholonomic
spherical robot by combining sliding mode controller and model prediction
controller,” IEEE Robot. Automat. Lett., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 11617–11624,
Oct. 2022.
[4] S. Chen and J. T. Wen, “Adaptive neural trajectory tracking control for
flexible-joint robots with online learning,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot.
Automat., 2020, pp. 2358–2364.
[5] H. Wang, “Adaptive control of robot manipulators with uncertain kinematics and dynamics,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Control, vol. 62, no. 2,
pp. 948–954, Feb. 2017.
[6] J. Dallas, M. P. Cole, P. Jayakumar, and T. Ersal, “Terrain adaptive
trajectory planning and tracking on deformable terrains,” IEEE Trans. Veh.
Technol., vol. 70, no. 11, pp. 11255–11268, Nov. 2021.
[7] Q. Zhang, W. Pan, and V. Reppa, “Model-reference reinforcement learning for collision-free tracking control of autonomous surface vehicles,”
IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 7, pp. 8770–8781, Jul.
2022.

Authorized licensed use limited to: SOUTH CHINA UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on March 26,2026 at 07:24:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6796

IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS, VOL. 30, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

[8] M. Capotondi, G. Turrisi, C. Gaz, V. Modugno, G. Oriolo, and A. D.
Luca, “An online learning procedure for feedback linearization control without torque measurements,” in Proc. Conf. Robot Learn., 2020,
pp. 1359–1368.
[9] T. Miki, J. Lee, J. Hwangbo, L. Wellhausen, V. Koltun, and M. Hutter,
“Learning robust perceptive locomotion for quadrupedal robots in the
wild,” Sci. Robot., vol. 7, no. 62, 2022, Art. no. eabk2822.
[10] F. Jenelten, R. Grandia, F. Farshidian, and M. Hutter, “TAMOLS: Terrainaware motion optimization for legged systems,” IEEE Trans. Robot.,
vol. 38, no. 6, pp. 3395–3413, Dec. 2022.
[11] T. P. Nascimento, C. E. T. Dórea, and L. M. G. Gonçalves, “Nonholonomic
mobile robots’ trajectory tracking model predictive control: A survey,”
Robotica, vol. 36, no. 5, pp. 676–696, 2018.
[12] T. P. Nascimento, C. E. T. Dórea, and L. M. G. Gonçalves, “Nonlinear
model predictive control for trajectory tracking of nonholonomic mobile
robots: A modified approach,” Int. J. Adv. Robotic Syst., vol. 15, no. 1,
2018, Art. no. 1729881418760461.
[13] K. Zhang, Q. Sun, and Y. Shi, “Trajectory tracking control of autonomous
ground vehicles using adaptive learning MPC,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 12, pp. 5554–5564, Dec. 2021.
[14] M. V. Minniti, R. Grandia, F. Farshidian, and M. Hutter, “Adaptive CLFMPC with application to quadrupedal robots,” IEEE Robot. Automat. Lett.,
vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 565–572, Jan. 2022.
[15] B. Siciliano, L. Sciavicco, L. Villani, and G. Oriolo, Robotics: Modelling,
Planning and Control, Ser. Advanced Textbooks in Control and Signal
Processing. London, U.K.: Springer, 2010.
[16] J.-W. Liu, F.-L. Zuo, Y.-X. Guo, T.-Y. Li, and J.-M. Chen, “Research on
improved wavelet convolutional wavelet neural networks,” Appl. Intell.,
vol. 51, pp. 1–21, 2021.
[17] Z. X. H. F. Qin, “Model predictive trajectory tracking control of unmanned
vehicles based on radial basis function neural network optimisation,” Proc.
Inst. Mech. Engineers, Part D: J. Automobile Eng., vol. 237, no. 2–3,
pp. 347–361, 2023.
[18] Y. Zhang, H. Zheng, J. Xu, and Z. Wang, “Radial basis function
model-based adaptive model predictive control for trajectory tracking
of a clapping-wing micro air vehicle,” Aerospace, vol. 10, no. 3, 2023,
Art. no. 253.
[19] E. Kang, H. Qiao, J. Gao, and W. Yang, “Neural network-based model
predictive tracking control of an uncertain robotic manipulator with input
constraints,” ISA Trans., vol. 109, pp. 89–101, 2021.
[20] Z. Chu, D. Wang, and F. Meng, “An adaptive RBF-NMPC architecture
for trajectory tracking control of underwater vehicles,” Machines, vol. 9,
no. 5, 2021, Art. no. 105.
[21] J. Nubert, J. Köhler, V. Berenz, F. Allgöwer, and S. Trimpe, “Safe and fast
tracking on a robot manipulator: Robust MPC and neural network control,”
IEEE Robot. Automat. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 3050–3057, Apr. 2020.
[22] C. Dawson, Z. Qin, S. Gao, and C. Fan, “Safe nonlinear control using robust
neural Lyapunov-barrier functions,” in Proc. 5th Conf. Robot Learn.,
PMLR, 2022, pp. 1724–1735.
[23] Z. Wu and P. D. Christofides, “Control Lyapunov-barrier function-based
predictive control of nonlinear systems using machine learning models,”
in Proc. Amer. Control Conf., 2020, pp. 2754–2759.
[24] S. Levine and V. Koltun, “Guided policy search,” in Proc. 30th Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn., 2013, pp. 1–9.
[25] B. McMahan, “Follow-the-regularized-leader and mirror descent: Equivalence theorems and l1 regularization,” in Proc. 14th Int. Conf. Artif. Intell.
Statist. JMLR Workshop Conf. Proc., 2011, pp. 525–533.
[26] D. Saad, “Online algorithms and stochastic approximations,” Online
Learn., vol. 5, no. 3, 1998, Art. no. 6.
[27] Y. Liu, Y. Wang, X. Guan, T. Hu, Y. Wang, and G. Li, “New hierarchical
sliding mode control method for velocity tracking of the spherical robot,”
in Proc. China Automat. Congr., 2021, pp. 1455–1460.
[28] X. Zhao, S. Han, B. Tao, Z. Yin, and H. Ding, “Model-based actor-critic
learning of robotic impedance control in complex interactive environment,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 69, no. 12, pp. 13225–13235,
Dec. 2022.
[29] R. Grandia, A. J. Taylor, A. Singletary, M. Hutter, and A. D. Ames, “Nonlinear model predictive control of robotic systems with control Lyapunov
functions,” in Proc. Robot.: Sci. Syst., 2020.
[30] J. A. E. Andersson, J. Gillis, G. Horn, J. B. Rawlings, and M. Diehl,
“CasADi–A software framework for nonlinear optimization and optimal
control,” Math. Program. Comput., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 1–36, 2019.
[31] A. Wächter and L. Biegler, “On the implementation of an interior-point
filter line-search algorithm for large-scale nonlinear programming,” Math.
Program., vol. 106, pp. 25–57, 2006.

Yifan Liu (Graduate Student Member, IEEE)
received the B.Eng. degree in biosystems engineering in 2020 from Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, China, where he is currently working
toward the Ph.D. degree in control science and
engineering.
His research interests include motion planning and control for robotics, adaptive control,
optimization and optimal control, and reinforcement learning.

Tao Hu received the M.A. degrees in control science and engineering from Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, China, in 2024.
His research interests include motion planning and control of robots.

Xiaoqing Guan (Graduate Student Member,
IEEE) received the B.Eng. degree in control science and engineering in 2019 from Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China, where he is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in control science and engineering.
His research interests include motion planning and control of robots and model predictive
control.

Yixu Wang received the Ph.D. degrees in control science and engineering from Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China, in 2023.
His research interests include motion planning and control of robots.

Bixuan Zhang received the B.Eng. degree in
control science and engineering in 2020 from
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China, where he
is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in
control science and engineering.
His research interests include motion planning and control, as well as structural design
and modeling for robots.

Authorized licensed use limited to: SOUTH CHINA UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on March 26,2026 at 07:24:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: ADAPTIVE MPC-BASED MULTI-TERRAIN TRAJECTORY TRACKING FRAMEWORK FOR MOBILE SPHERICAL ROBOTS

You Wang (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree in biomedical engineering from Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China, in 2007.
He is with the State Key Laboratory of Industrial Control Technology, Institute of CyberSystems and Control, Zhejiang University. He is
currently an Associate Professor with the College of Control Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University. His research interests include
motion planning and control for robotics, and
biosensors.

6797

Guang Li received the Ph.D. degree in biomedical engineering from the Centre for Biological
and Medical Systems, Imperial College of Science, Technology, and Medicine, London, U.K.,
in 1998.
He was a Postdoctoral Engineer with the University of Glasgow, Glasgow, U.K., and Moor
Instruments Company Ltd., Axminster, U.K.
He is currently with the State Key Laboratory of Industrial Control Technology, Institute of
Cyber-Systems and Control, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China, where he is also a Professor with the Institute
of Cyber-System and Control. His research interests include sensors,
medical instruments, neuroinformatics, and mobile robotics.

Authorized licensed use limited to: SOUTH CHINA UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on March 26,2026 at 07:24:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

